feat: provider spec revamp (#107)
web3-storage/specs: w3-provider.md

## Concepts

### Roles

There are several distinct roles that [principal]s may assume in described specification:

| Name        | Description                                                                                                                                    |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Principal | The general class of entities that interact with a UCAN. Listed in the `iss` or `aud` field |
| Account    | [Principal] identified by memorable identifier like [`did:mailto`]. |
| Agent       | [Principal] identified by [`did:key`] identifier, representing a user in some application installation |
| Issuer | Principal sharing access. It is the signer of the [UCAN]. Listed in the `iss` field |
| Audience | Principal access is shared with. Listed in the `aud` field |

### Provider

Provider is service implementing protocol complaint capability handlers. When [space] is provisioned with a provider, capabilities invoked on that space are routed to a corresponding capability provider.

> As we have above established in the introduction, users create spaces and manage access through delegated capabilities. However, when capability `store/add` of `did:key:zAlice` [space] is invoked, some program needs to perform a task corresponding to that capability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As established in the introduction, users create spaces and manage access through delegated capabilities. However, when a capability (say, `store/add`) is invoked on a [space] (say, `did:key:zAlicesSpace`) is invoked, some program needs to perform a task corresponding to that capability.
```

> Programs that perform can perform such tasks in protocol compliant manner are offered by capability providers, or providers for short, through a [subscription]. Users can get a subscription from service by agreeing to their terms of service. [Subscription] can be used to provision [space] with capabilities, offered under the terms of subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Programs that perform can perform such tasks in a protocol compliant manner are offered by capability providers, or providers for short, through a [subscription]. Users can get a subscription from a service by agreeing to their terms of service. A [subscription] can be used to provision a [space] with capabilities, contingent on the terms of subscription.
```

> Capability invoked on the space is routed to the capability provider that space is provisioned with. If [space] is not provisioned with invoked capability, invocation SHOULD fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A capability invoked on the space is routed to the capability provider that space is provisioned with. If a [space] is not provisioned with the invoked capability, invocation SHOULD fail.
```

### Subscription

> Subscription is an agreement to terms of service. Broadly speaking [customer] agree to pay metered service fee for the provided service and in return [provider] service agrees to provide set of protocol compliant capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A subscription is an agreement to some terms of service. Broadly speaking a [customer] agrees to pay a metered service fee for the provided service and in return the [provider] service agrees to provide a set of protocol compliant capabilities.
```

Every [UCAN] invocation gets a signed receipt from the [provider] and can be used by the [customer] to hold service accountable if they violate terms of service.

> Subscription MAY be suspended or terminated by the [provider] if [customer] violates terms of service. [Customer] MAY terminate subscription when they no longer wish to receive the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A subscription MAY be suspended or terminated by the [provider] if the [customer] violates the terms of service. A [customer] MAY terminate a subscription when they no longer wish to receive the service.
```

> When subscription is established, [provider] MUST delegate `subscription/*` capabilities to the subscribed [customer]. Capabilities under `subscription/*` namespace MUST follow described protocol, allowing [customer] to manage their subscription and provision spaces with capabilities offered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a subscription is established, the [provider] MUST delegate `subscription/*` capabilities to the subscribed [customer]. Capabilities under `subscription/*` namespace MUST follow the described protocol, allowing the [customer] to manage their subscription and provision spaces with capabilities offered.
```

### Provision

> [Customer] with an active [subscription] MAY provision [space] with set of capabilities offered by the [subscription]. [Customer] MAY set limits on the space provision to manage costs, which makes provisioning [space] controlled by third party financially viable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [customer] with an active [subscription] MAY provision a [space] with set of capabilities offered by the [subscription]. A [customer] MAY set limits on the space provision to manage costs, which makes provisioning a [space] controlled by third party financially viable.
```

> [Subscription] can be conceptualized as a leasing agreement between [provider] and [customer], in which case [provision] can be viewed as subleasing agreement between [customer] and a [space].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [subscription] can be conceptualized as a leasing agreement between a [provider] and a [customer], in which case a [provision] can be viewed as a subleasing agreement between a [customer] and a [space].
```

### Customer

> Customer is a user [account] that has a [subscription] with a service [provider].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A customer is a user [account] that has a [subscription] with a service [provider].
```

> ℹ️ Customer does not need to own or even have access to a [space], e.g. employer MAY setup an [account], setup [subscription] and use it to [provision] employee [space]s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ℹ️ A customer does not need to own or even have access to a [space], e.g. an employer MAY setup an [account], setup a [subscription] and use it to [provision] employee [space]s.
```

### Space

> Namespace, or space for short, is an owned resource that can be shared. It corresponds to the asymmetric keypair and is identified by the [`did:key`] URI. Space can be provisioned with capabilities provided by the [provider] through a [subscription].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A namespace, often referred as a "space", is an owned resource that can be shared. It corresponds to a unique asymmetric cryptographic keypair and is identified by a [`did:key`] URI. A space can be provisioned with capabilities provided by a [provider] through a [subscription].
```

Is it worth talking about what we mean by "owned" here?

# Capabilities

> Here we describe protocol for arranging subscriptions and using it to provision [space]s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we describe a protocol for arranging subscriptions and using them to provision [space]s.
```

## Provider Capabilities

### Provider Add

> User MAY invoke `provider/add` capability on the [account] subject (`with` field) to start a subscription with [provider] (`aud` field).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user MAY invoke the `provider/add` capability on the [account] subject (`with` field) to start a subscription with a [provider] (`aud` field).
```

Hm, this is a bit confusing - does "`with` field" refer to the invocation UCAN? Would be great to clarify this. Similar for "`aud` field" - I feel like that needs a bit more context.

#### Subscription Provider

> The audience of the invocation (`aud` field) MUST be a [provider] [DID] of the desired [subscription].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The audience of the invocation (`aud` field) MUST be the [provider] [DID] of the desired [subscription].
```

#### Subscription Customer

> The subject of the invocation (`with` field) MUST be a [customer] [DID] of the desired [subscription].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The subject of the invocation (`with` field) MUST be the [customer] [DID] of the desired [subscription].
```

#### Subscription Plan

> Provider MAY offer multiple subscription plans. Invocation MAY specify desired plan using `nb.product` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A provider MAY offer multiple subscription plans. An invocation MAY specify the user's desired plan using `nb.product` field.
```

#### Provider Add Example

```json
{
  "v": "0.9.1",
  "iss": "did:key:z6Mkk...xALi",
  "aud": "did:web:web3.storage",
  "att": [
    {
      "with": "did:mailto:web.mail:alice",
      "can": "provider/add",
      "nb": {
        "product": "did:web:lite.web3.storage"
      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [{ "/": "bafy...prf1" }],
  "exp": 1685602800,
  "s": {
    "/": {
      "bytes": "7aEDQJbJqmyMxTxcK05XQKWfvxG+Tv+LWCJeE18RSMnciCZ/RQ21U75LA0uFSvIjdqnF5RaauZTE8mh2ZYMBBejdJQ4"
    }
  }
}
```

#### Provider Add IPLD Schema

```ipldsch
type ProviderAddCapability struct {
  with      AccountDID
  nb        ProviderAdd
}

type ProviderAdd struct {
  product optional String
}
```

#### Subscription State

> [Provider] MUST return a variant of the `SubscriptionState` on a successful invocation of the `provider/add`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [Provider] MUST return a variant of the `SubscriptionState` on a successful invocation of the `provider/add`.
```

#### Subscription State IPLD Schema

```ipldsch
type SubscriptionState union {
  PendingSubscription     "pending"
  ActiveSubscription      "active"
} representation keyed
```

#### Pending Subscription

> [Provider] MUST return `PendingSubscription` variant when it requires an out-of-bound interaction to start a subscription. For example provider MAY require payment setup for the billing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [Provider] MUST return a `PendingSubscription` variant when it requires an out-of-bound interaction to start a subscription. For example, a provider MAY require payment setup for the billing.
```

##### Pending Subscription Schema

```ipldsch
type PendingSubscription struct {
  provider      ProviderDID
  order         String
  url           URLString
}

type URLString = string
type ProviderDID = DID
```

##### Pending Subscription URL

> The `url` field MUST be set to the location user is expected to navigate, to complete subscription process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `url` field MUST be set to the location to which the user is expected to navigate to complete subscription process.
```

##### Pending Subscription Provider

The `provider` field MUST be set to the [DID] of the [subscription] [provider].

#### Active Subscription

> [Provider] MUST return `ActiveSubscription` variant when out-of-bound interaction is not required. For example provider may offer a free plan to any [account]. Provider could return `ActiveSubscription` if it already has billing info for the [account].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [Provider] MUST return an `ActiveSubscription` variant when out-of-bound interaction is not required. For example, a provider may offer a free plan to any [account]. The provider could return `ActiveSubscription` if it already has billing info for the [account].
```

##### Active Subscription Schema

```ipldsch
type ActiveSubscription struct {
  provider          ProviderDID

>   product           ProductDID

Reviewer: Should `product` be required to be a DID? I don't see a reason we'd need this to be a DID at the protocol level.

>   product           ProductDID

Author: ```suggestion
  product           URL
```

Author: How about we just make it a URL, not strictly necessary either but seems like a nudge into a right direction so implementers are forced to namespace

  order             String
  proof             Link
}
```

##### Active Subscription Provider

The `provider` field MUST be set to the [DID] of the [subscription] [provider].

##### Active Subscription Plan

The `product` field MUST be set to the chosen subscription plan.

##### Subscription Proof

> The `proof` field MUST be a link to a valid delegation for `subscription/*` capabilities. The audience (`aud` field) of the `proof` MUST be set to the [customer] of the subscription. Subject (`with` field) of the `proof` MUST be set to the [provider] of the subscription. The `nb.customer` field of the `proof` MUST be set to the [customer] of the subscription. The `nb.order` field of the `proof` MUST be set to the unique identifier of the subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `proof` field of the `provider/add` invocation MUST be a link to a valid delegation of `subscription/*` capabilities. 

The audience (`aud` field) of the delegation (the `proof`) MUST be set to the [customer] of the subscription. The subject (`with` field) of the `proof` MUST be set to the [provider] of the subscription. The `nb.customer` field of the `proof` MUST be set to the [customer] of the subscription. The `nb.order` field of the `proof` MUST be set to the unique identifier of the subscription.
```

###### Subscription Proof Example

```json
{
  "v": "0.9.1",
  "iss": "did:web:web3.storage",
  "aud": "did:mailto:web.mail:alice",
  "att": [
    {
      "can": "subscription/*",
      "with": "did:web:web3.storage",
      "nb": {
        "customer": "did:mailto:web.mail:alice",
        "order": "bafy...prf1"
      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "exp": 1685602800,
  "s": {
    "/": {
      "bytes": "7aEDQ..dJQ4"
    }
  }
}
```

### Provider List

> User MAY invoke `provider/list` capability on the [account] subject (`with` field) to list all subscriptions it has with a [provider] (`aud` field).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user MAY invoke the `provider/list` capability on the [account] subject (`with` field) to list all subscriptions it has with a [provider] (`aud` field).
```

#### Provider List Schema

```ipldsch
type ProviderListCapability struct {
  with      AccountDID
  nb        ProviderList
}

type struct ProviderList struct {}
```

### Provider Remove

> User MAY invoke `provider/remove` capability on the [account] subject (`with` field) to cancel a subscription with [provider] (`aud` field).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user MAY invoke the `provider/remove` capability on the [account] subject (`with` field) to cancel a subscription with [provider] (`aud` field).
```

#### Provider Remove Schema

```ipldsch
type ProviderRemoveCapability struct {
  with    AccountDID
  nb      ProviderRemove
}

type ProviderRemove struct {
  order optional String
}
```

## Subscription Capabilities

### Subscription Capabilities Schema

```ipldsch
type Subscription union {
  SubscriptionAddCapability       "subscription/add"
  SubscriptionRemoveCapability    "subscription/remove"
  SubscriptionListCapability      "subscription/list"
} representation inline {
  discriminantKey "can"
}
```

### Subscription Add

> User MAY invoke `subscription/add` capability to provision desired [space] with the capabilities provided through subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user MAY invoke the `subscription/add` capability to provision desired [space] with the capabilities provided through the subscription.
```

#### Subscription Add Schema

```ipldsch
type SubscriptionAddCapability struct {
  with      ProviderDID
  nb        SubscriptionAdd
}

type SubscriptionAdd struct {
  customer  AccountDID
  order     String
  consumer  SpaceDID
  budget    Budget
}

type Budget { String: Int }
```

#### Subscription Consumer

The `nb.consumer` MUST be set to the [space] DID to be provisioned.

#### Subscription Budget

The `nb.budget` MUST be set to the map where keys are names of the capacities and values are the allowed utilization per billing cycle.

> > ℹ️ Adding [space] to the subscription twice only causes previous budget to be merged with the new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ℹ️ Adding a [space] to a subscription twice only causes previous budget to be merged with the new one.
```

### Subscription Remove

> User MAY invoke `subscription/remove` capability to remove [space] from this subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user MAY invoke the `subscription/remove` capability to remove a [space] from this subscription.
```

#### Subscription Remove Schema

```ipldsch
type SubscriptionRemoveCapability struct {
  with      ProviderDID
  nb        SubscriptionRemove
}

type SubscriptionRemove struct {
  customer  AccountDID
  order     String
  consumer  SpaceDID
}
```

### Subscription List

> Agent MAY invoke `subscription/list` capability to list provisions under this subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An agent MAY invoke the `subscription/list` capability to list provisions under this subscription.
```

#### Subscription Budget

The `nb.budget` MUST be set to the map where keys are names of the capacities and values are the allowed utilization per billing cycle.

> ℹ️ Adding a [space] to a subscription twice only causes previous budget to be merged with the new one.

### Subscription Remove

A user MAY invoke the `subscription/remove` capability to remove a [space] from this subscription.

#### Subscription Remove Schema

```ipldsch
type SubscriptionRemoveCapability struct {
  with      ProviderDID
  nb        SubscriptionRemove
}

type SubscriptionRemove struct {
  customer  AccountDID
  order     String
  consumer  SpaceDID
}
```

### Subscription List

An agent MAY invoke the `subscription/list` capability to list provisions under this subscription.

#### Subscription List Schema

```ipldsch
type SubscriptionListCapability struct {
  with      ProviderDID
  nb        SubscriptionList
}

type SubscriptionList struct {
  customer  AccountDID
  order     String
}
```

[did:key]: https://w3c-ccg.github.io/did-method-key/
[UCAN]:https://github.com/ucan-wg/spec/blob/692e8aab59b763a783fe1484131c3f40d997b69a/README.md

> [principal]:https://github.com/ucan-wg/spec/blob/

Author: ```suggestion
[principal]:https://github.com/ucan-wg/spec/blob/692e8aab59b763a783fe1484131c3f40d997b69a/README.md#321-principals
```

[provider]:#provider
[`did:mailto`]:./did-mailto.md
[`did:key`]:https://w3c-ccg.github.io/did-method-key/
[customer]:#customer

> [account]:#account

Author: ```suggestion
[account]:./w3-account.md#account
```
